
-----------------
Ribollita Soup    serves 4-6

1/4 c. extra-virgin olive oil
1 onion chopped
several sliced carrots
4 oz. pancetta, chopped  (this is Italian bacon, so I used regular bacon--also could be omitted for vegan, or to lower fat content)
2 garlic cloves, 1 minced and 1 whole
1 teaspoon salt (or less)
1 teaspoon fresh ground pepper
1 tablespoon tomato paste
15 oz can diced tomatoes (not drained)
10 oz pkg frozen spinach, thawed (I only partially thawed. Article said any greens will work--fresh or frozen)
15 oz can cannellini beans, drained ( these are the same as great northern beans)
1 teaspoon herbes de Provence (or more - had trouble finding this too, but it is a mixture of rosemary, marjoram, thyme, sage, tarragon, lavender - according to        what I found. I ended up getting a McCormick French Herb Roasting Rub, but it had onion, salt, garlic and other spices added--so I used less salt)
3 cups chicken or vegetable stock ( I used more)
1 bay leaf
1 piece parmesan cheese rind, 3 inches (no luck here either so I did without, but according to the article with the recipe it is a secret ingredient of Italian recipes         that really adds to the flavor)
4-6 ciabatta rolls, halved length-wise (or any old bread; here again I improvised with bagged garlic parmesan panetini from the Food Lion deli--it is already   toasted and seasoned so saved on time)
grated parmesan cheese

Heat the oil in a heavy large pot over medium heat. Add the onion, carrot, pancetta, minced garlic, salt and pepper. Cook until the onion is golden brown and the pancetta is crisp, about 7 minutes.

Add tomato paste and stir until dissolved.  Add tomatoes and stir, scraping the bottom of the pan with a wooden spoon to release all the brown bits.  Add the spinach, beans, herbs, stock, bay leaf, and the parmesan rind. Bring soup to a boil, reduce heat and simmer for 30 minutes.

Meanwhile preheat the oven to 350 degrees. Drizzle the ciabatta halves with olive oil. Toast until golden brown, about 5 minutes. Remove from the oven and rub the top of the toasts with the whole garlic clove.

Place the toasts in the serving bowls and ladle the soup over the toasts. Sprinkle with parmesan and serve immediately.